+++
date = "2022-08-17"
title = "Uber Engineering Paper: A Study of Real-World Data Races in Golang"
+++

> **Observation**
>
> * Developers using Go employ significantly more concurrency and synchronization constructs than in Java.
>
> * Developers using Go for programming microservices expose significantly more runtime concurrency than other languages such as Java, Python, and NodeJS used for the same purpose.
>
> * Transparent capture-by-reference of free variables in goroutines is a recipe for data races.
>
> * Slices are highly confusing types that create subtle and hard to diagnose data races.
>
> * Built-in maps in Go make them commonly used. The array-style syntax of map accesses provides a false illusion of disjoint accesses of elements. However, map implementation is thread-unsafe in Go causing frequent data races.
>
> * Pass-by-value semantics are recommended in Go because it simplifies escape analysis and gives variables a better chance to be allocated on the stack, which reduces pressure on the garbage collector. Developers often err on the side of pass-by-value (or methods over values), which can cause non-trivial data races.
>
> * Mixed use of message passing (channels) and shared memory makes code complex and susceptible to data races.
>
> * Go offers more leeway in its group synchronization construct sync.WaitGroup. The number of participants is dynamic. Incorrect placement of Add and Done methods of a sync.WaitGroup lead to data races.
>
> * Running tests in parallel for Go’s table-driven test suite idiom can often cause data races, either in the product or test code.
>
> * Incorrect use of mutual exclusion primitives leads to data races.

> **Remark**
>
> Future programming language designers should carefully weigh different language features and coding idioms with their potential to create common or arcane concurrency bugs.

* Explicit is better than implicit.

[Link](https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.00764)

[Dynamic Data Race Detection in Go Code](https://www.uber.com/blog/dynamic-data-race-detection-in-go-code/)

[Data Race Patterns in Go](https://www.uber.com/blog/data-race-patterns-in-go/)
