+++
date = "2023-07-23"
title = "mahesh's blog: What we talk about when we talk about System Design"
+++

> 1. ***Late-bind on designs***.
>
> The goal of the design process is not to generate a single point solution, but to instead
> characterize the design space for a given problem: a single point should then fall naturally out
> of that space given the problem constraints. Converging early on a single design is harmful; the
> team should have the ability to jump from one part of the space to another right until a solution
> is picked.
>
> 2. ***Each point solution is a DoS attack on the design process***.
>
> Talking about individual designs in isolation slows down design. Talking about designs in the
> context of the design space accelerates design. New designs should be described in terms of the
> design space, so you can immediately convey their relative position compared to other point
> solutions.
>
> 3. ***Think in parallel; Design together; Implement in parallel; Review together***.
>
> Certain parts of the design and development process are creative and should be parallelized /
> sharded, while others require discipline and should be centralized / broadcast.
>
> 4. ***Talk about the problem, not existing systems***.
>
>   * Solution Complexity » Problem Complexity
>   * Solution Bias
>
> 5. ***Always talk about a second application***.
>
> Practically, even if you are implementing only one app, it helps to always consider a second app
> (or even implement one in tests); to prevent application specifics from leaking into the
> abstraction.
>
> 6. ***For each abstraction, build one implementation; plan for a second; hope for a third***.
>
>  In the opposite direction, you don’t want the abstraction’s semantics to rely on its
>  implementation details. One way to ensure this is to talk about multiple implementations in the
>  design process.
>
> 7. ***Abstraction is not free***.
>
> Abstraction is a balancing act between two types of complexity: the complexity of concreteness and
> the complexity of abstractness. Each time you add a layer of abstraction, have a precise
> characterization for why it has to exist, as well as the division of functionality between this
> layer and the ones around it.
>
> 8. ***Be critical (but about the right things)***.
>
> One way to approach design is to continually de-risk the pieces that are truly unknown; while
> deferring work on the pieces that are difficult but known. (In the opposite direction, researchers
> need to be more focused on details and practicality, but this happens naturally in an industry
> environment).

[Link](https://maheshba.bitbucket.io/blog/2023/07/12/Design.html)
