+++
date = "2024-11-18"
title = "Istio Blog: Scaling in the Clouds: Istio Ambient vs. Cilium"
+++

> Despite offering a similar feature set on the surface, the two projects have substantially
> different architectures, most notably Cilium’s use of eBPF and WireGuard for processing and
> encrypting L4 traffic in the kernel, contrasted with Istio’s ztunnel component for L4 in user
> space. These differences have resulted in substantial speculation about how Istio will perform at
> scale compared to Cilium.
>
> While many comparisons have been made about tenancy models, security protocols and basic
> performance of the two projects, there has not yet been a full evaluation published at enterprise
> scale. Rather than emphasizing theoretical performance, we put Istio’s ambient mode and Cilium
> through their paces, focusing on key metrics like latency, throughput, and resource consumption.
> We cranked up the pressure with realistic load scenarios, simulating a bustling Kubernetes
> environment. Finally, we pushed the size of our AKS cluster up to 1,000 nodes on 11,000 cores, to
> understand how these projects perform at scale. Our results show areas where each can improve, but
> also indicate that Istio is the clear winner.
>
> ## Behind the Scenes: Why the Difference?
>
> The key to understanding these performance differences lies in the architecture and design of each tool.
>
> * **Cilium’s Control Plane Conundrum**: Cilium runs a control plane instance on each node, leading to
>   API server strain and configuration overhead as your cluster expands. This frequently caused our
>   API server to crash, followed by Cilium becoming unready, and the entire cluster becoming
>   unresponsive.
> * **Istio’s Efficiency Edge**: Istio, with its centralized control plane and identity-based approach,
>   streamlines configuration and reduces the burden on your API server and nodes, directing
>   critical resources to processing and securing your traffic, rather than processing
>   configuration. Istio takes further advantage of the resources not used in the control plane by
>   running as many Envoy instances as a workload needs, while Cilium is limited to one shared Envoy
>   instance per node.
>
> ## Digging Deeper
>
> ### Hidden Costs
>
> While Istio operates entirely in user space, Cilium’s L4 dataplane runs in the Linux kernel using
> eBPF. Prometheus metrics for resource consumption only measure user space resources, meaning that
> all kernel resources used by Cilium are not accounted for in this test.
>
> ## Recommendations: Choosing the Right Tool for the Job
>
> So, what’s the verdict? Well, it depends on your specific needs and priorities. For small clusters
> with pure L3/L4 use cases and no requirement for encryption, Cilium offers a cost-effective and
> performant solution. However, for larger clusters and a focus on stability, scalability, and
> advanced features, Istio’s ambient mode, along with an alternate NetworkPolicy implementation, is
> the way to go. Many customers choose to combine the L3/L4 features of Cilium with the L4/L7 and
> encryption features of Istio for a defense-in-depth strategy.
>
> Remember, the world of cloud-native networking is constantly evolving. Keep an eye on developments
> in both Istio and Cilium, as they continue to improve and address these challenges.

[Link](https://www.pulumi.com/blog/from-cdk-pulumi-evolution-of-sst)
